we have to ask ourselves as individuals
are we proponents of veganism in the
ideological sense that medieval
Catholics would propound Christianity as
the one true doctrine going around
saying either you're with us or against
us either you believe or you do not
believe and if you doubt if you question
if you point out complexities
contradictions and paradoxes then you're
an enemy of the faith is that how we
think about veganism or do we think
about veganism like democracy I just saw
a video blog about from a ballet see an
evolution and i partly agree with him
and porky disagree with him I've just
come from a really well quite a short
conversation with a couple of other
vegans that I know from YouTube the
first one is Charlie who is the vegan
cheater and the second one is a ballast
yell a movie n that's how you pronounce
his youtube name that his actual name is
either maza to be honest with you I
haven't kept up with anybody's content
except for my boy I zelma Zard abala CL
i have been watching his videos because
I for me personally his videos are the
most relevant and his content makes the
most sense to me
the value of democracy is limited the
value of veganism is limited democracy
solves some problems but not others
democracy creates some problems but not
others I would go so far as to say that
it is impossible to be an uncritical
advocate for democracy it's it's almost
impossible to be an ideological advocate
for democracy anyone who supports
democracy must at the same time off for
a critique of democracy they must be
both a supporter and a critic and this
goes back to Aristotle lucida T's
ancient Greek and Roman sources lucidity
is very upset that democracies kept
starting Wars for rather silly reasons
doesn't mean that dictatorships do not
but is a major area of critique
nevertheless it would be ridiculous to
look back at those ancient authors and
say well obviously all these people are
simply against democracy because they
dare to criticize it now I myself am an
example of someone who is accused of not
being vegan or people ask me in a
ridiculous way are you even vegan at all
because i do not uncritical ii endorse
veganism I'm willing to really talk
about what are the limitations what are
the contradictions what are the
complexities and what are the paradoxes
i'm using paradox in an old-fashioned
sense here but it's some ways the most
important meaning the word has got i
don't mean a charming puzzle when I'm
speaking of a paradox this runs contrary
to certain tendencies in human nature
it's it's very hard for people to
develop and open-minded pragmatic
down-to-earth approach to politics
that's willing to shall we say
countenance contradictions to
acknowledge recognize contradictions and
say okay there are some problems here we
can't solve there's some problems here
that are outside of our comfort zone and
we're going to deal with them one at a
time
maybe we're going to have difficult and
contradictory answers to these questions
human nature as seen in religious
experiences tends to want to elevate one
ideal and the ideal maybe only a few
sentences long it's not going to be
complicated and to believe that that
ideal solves all problems and then to
confront the world with the challenge
that either they must believe in this
ideal either it must be true for
everyone in all times or they must
reject it so this is thinking of ideas
as salvific and as solving all problems
and of course Christianity tended to
kill huge numbers of people in disputes
over incredibly trivial differences
between two or three different forms of
Christianity I don't know why I said two
or three a hundred different forms Chris
J a thousand but anyway look at just the
history of Switzerland it's unbelievable
how many different factions of
Christianity thought they had the the
truth that would solve all problems and
we're going to kill each other for it
people have responded amazingly negative
lead is something I barely mentioned on
this channel this channel I said in
passing that getting enough calcium was
not easy was not self explanatory on a
vegan diet and the fact that people
would react to that by attacking me
shows they're thinking about veganism
the way a medieval person would think of
Catholicism either you accept this
concepts you know Whole Foods
plant-based vegan diet solves all your
dietary problems except b12 but aside
from b12 there are no complications
there are no problems nobody should
admit that anything is problematic or
complex or contradictory or your auntie
vegan either you're for us or against us
either you accept the Catholic Church
solves all our problems and has no
connections or this is this is a
dogmatic way of thinking again in a
classical sense of dogmatism the
contrasting attitude to cultivate is to
accept democracy doesn't solve all
problems veganism doesn't solve all
problems even if I'm a proponent of
veganism I should be willing to critique
its shortcomings its limitations
the same way I'm willing and eager to
critique the shortcomings of limitations
of democracy even though I'm the most
pro-democracy person in the world
there's a video on providing a link to
so below this video there's a link to a
monologue from Jay Kings and Jake is
reflecting on the complexity of
calculating how much calcium is in your
diet so there's more than one reason for
something to be complex but even if you
just listen to the first few minutes of
this video I think Jake does a pretty
good job of setting out for you why it's
not even easy to know whether or not
you're getting enough calcium in your
diet you can do it you can do the math
very few people do i do not want to be
part of a religion that is built on a
lie i do not want to be part of a diet
that is built on a lie i do not want to
be part of a political movement that is
built on a lie if your idea of veganism
requires that vegans pretend there are
no complexities in getting enough
calcium there are no contradictions
there are no difficulty that this is
simple in universal and that anyone who
questions the adequacy of calcium and
vegan diet is aunty vegan then we're
really into you know medieval
Catholicism this ridiculous and it's
interesting to me I think the people who
react this way are themselves least
aware of how political and religious
their beliefs are look democracy has
limitations and they're arbitrary and
terrifying and sometimes we come to the
limits of human knowledge where nobody
has any good answers where we only have
good questions if you live in a small
town in the eastern United States you
may elect the mayor you may elect the
sheriff you may elect some really
strange titles of local officials that
are from like medieval English office
holders for city offices that came over
before the
evolution and words that have dropped
out of use even in England some really
weird job titles in United States
politics and these are general in the
east coast north west coast you know the
local pretty Provost or something like
this you know and yet no where do you
elect the guy who's in charge of the
nuclear power plant all systems of
democracy and again this is actually in
Aristotle especially in the constitution
of Athens by Aristotle it's reflected on
Aristotle's politics and their volumes
all democracies in history have been
terrified of assigning these sorts of
technically demanding positions to
elections they're terrified that the
most charismatic person will take over
the nuclear power plant they're
terrified that the most corrupt person
may take over the nuclear power plant
simply the person who's either very
wealthy or person who's taking bribes
from industrial lobby groups or what
have you and conversely within any given
polity within any given the province or
state there are probably only a few
people who have the technical expertise
to play that role well who are you know
experts in some combination of nuclear
physics and mechanical engineering who
have the types of skills and knowledge
to be responsible for a nuclear power
plant so maybe you only have two or
three guys like that who are willing to
take the job who aren't already employed
by someone who can pay them more money
than a government position like this so
do you think those guys are going to win
the election what if they're ugly what
if they speak with a stutter what if
they lack confidence they can't stand in
front of a crowd and rally support and
somebody else can somebody else can win
that election who has no scientific
qualifications whatsoever what if the
best technical experts all have
political views that make them very
unpopular maybe they were extreme
left-wing maybe they're extremely right
wing
maybe they're just eccentric this is a
limitation in democracy this is a
paradox in democracy that is fundamental
Aristotle did not have a good answer to
it it's called the technocratic problem
technocratic puzzle whatever you want to
say still today we have no good answer
for it and one of the hilarious things
is that if you look at these types of
fields how does the government figure
out who will be responsible for a
nuclear power plant often the process is
very similar in the worst dictatorship
and I don't know the most highly rated
democracy that democracy seems to just
break down and of course we run into all
kinds of other problems the case study
of Fukushima Daiichi major nuclear
accident in Japan just a few years ago
really it was a political disaster not a
scientific disaster the problems of
government oversight of democracy of
transparency of accountability as
applied to nuclear power it's a paradox
it's an incongruous set of contrasts and
we we have no solution to it it presents
us with unwanted complicated
contradictory information and currently
there is no simple solution political
science is barely a science there are
scientific aspects to it which I I'm in
the minority of people who like to draw
attention that there are scientific
aspects to political science but it is
certainly a social science what's
interesting to me is that diet also
although diet and nutrition are based in
directly on chemistry biology physiology
on hard sciences the vast majority of
what we deal with really is the
political science of diet it's the
social science aspect of diet it's not
so
what goes on in the laboratory it's okay
how do we take these recommendations and
findings and apply them to government
policy apply them to our own families
apply them to our own lives interpret
them in a way that makes sense in our
culture the basic fact that cigarettes
are poison was already known before
World War two in many ways our whole
civilization is still processing that
discovery you know the discovery of the
light bulb very rapidly transformed
society the discovery that cigarettes
are not healthy but are in fact
unhealthy indeed poisonous toxic
destructive whatever you want to say the
fact that cigarettes are bad for you
that is taken decades and decades to
really process through its implications
in terms of personal behavior government
policy or what have you and again the
complexities that I think we as humans
is the human race are dealing with with
with cigarettes are now are not
scientific their political or they're in
the social science about the person it's
possible you know some new research will
be done finding that cigarettes are even
worse for our health and we already know
it's possible some new you know some new
hard chemistry will turn up some some
new details about the effect cigarettes
everybody it's certainly possible there
will be more scientific breakthroughs of
that kind um I I i personally probably
won't care I won't be interested that
level of detail I am interested the
question of how do we as a society
reorganize and redefine our values and
adapt when I mean when I was traveling
with a newborn infant in France it was a
real problem that you know the the train
stations are still full of people
smoking cigarettes the moment the train
stops you know the doorway of the you
know you're not allowed to smoke inside
train it's a real problem was with my
pregnant wife who is now my ex-wife was
with my daughter's new foreign baby this
is this is what you're dealing with the
hint a out sympathy some some
experiences make these contradictions
more vivid in your own mind than others
veganism doesn't solve all problems the
belief that it should or that it must I
think is really a misplaced impulse
habitat conservation also does not solve
all problems and this contrast is
interesting to me because of course in
many ways habitat conservation addresses
questions that veganism leaves
unanswered you could have a society of
people who are one hundred percent vegan
but who are cutting down all the forests
in order to make paper and in order to
make wooden chairs and tables obviously
we need to address habitat conservation
also in addition to above and beyond
veganism conversely right now in 2016
the vast majority of people who are real
advocates for habitat conservation are
meteors many of them are hunters in my
society in Canada almost the only people
who really care about habitat
conservation or either involved in
hunting or fishing or other outdoor
sports as a terrible irony and it
reflects the weakness of urban culture
in addressing or even being concerned
with those things i wish i could tell
you there was a huge chorus of a vegan
interest in habitat conservation but
there isn't if you really ask yourself
honestly are there more vegans today
interested habitat conservation or
interested in yoga we all know the
answer is yoga and there's no meaningful
connection between veganism yoga none
sorry this is just it's just
happenstance right now people who like
veganism also happened like yoga but
there's there's nothing more to it than
that so in short political reality is
paradoxical and to a remarkable extent
dietary science as its applied to social
problems as its applied to our political
questions as vegans is by and large
paradoxical in the same way we have to
ask ourselves as individuals
are we proponents of veganism in the
ideological sense that medieval
Catholics would propound Christianity as
the one true doctrine going around
saying either you're with us or against
us either you believe or you do not
believe and if you doubt if you question
if you point out complexities
contradictions and paradoxes then you're
an enemy of the faith is that how we
think about veganism or do we think
about veganism like democracy as
something that is imperfect to begin
with it's going to be imperfect every
day that it exists and it's going to be
imperfect at the end of the process
democracy is not even in an historical
process of perfecting itself it's in a
state of perpetual imperfection and as
many limits it has many arbitrary
bizarre and corrupt features that today
we have no simple solutions to democracy
is not a is not like a salvific faith it
doesn't pretend to solve all problems
and in fact even some of the problems it
does pretend to solve when you get into
the details things are revealed to be
problematic and paradoxical I know that
you personally may have felt that
veganism improve your acne but don't
turn around and denounce someone else
because they're a vegan and they've
still got acne don't do it nutritional
science doesn't work that way human life
political reality it is more the way you
may be so proud that you lost weight on
a vegan diet don't turn around and
denounce someone else as being not
really vegan because they gain weight
because they are fat or they got fat in
a vegan diet don't do it that's that
medieval Catholic mentality of either
you're with us
against us etc okay and don't denounce
people because they're sincerely engaged
in a critique of veganism because
they're trying to improve it they're
trying to apply it to real world
situations that are as diverse as Canada
and Cambodia if you believe the anism is
for everybody then you must believe that
it's not just for people who believe in
the same political assumptions you
believe in you must believe it's for a
teenager in Cambodia and an old man in
China and for fat middle-aged people
like myself you must believe that people
who hate yoga or people who hate riding
a bicycle people who are left-wing
right-wing and all kinds of other things
are going to have to appropriate and
assimilate these ideas and apply them to
their lives and you know veganism does
not have a simple smoking gun scientific
fact to back it up I wish it did I wish
I could just say to people look you
should have zero dietary cholesterol
therefore you should be vegan in the
same sense that you should smoke zero
cigarettes it's not going to be that
easy our struggle is always going to be
more complex because it's ethical and
principal and all of the advice
surrounding health diet etc it's going
to remain on those shaky foundations of
the social sciences it's going to
continue to resemble political science
more than it does chemistry or physics
and like I said before we're going to
wrestle with it for decades and decades
the same way we've wrestled with the
implications of such simple facts as
that cigarettes cause lung cancer and
that alcohol causes brain damage